Catalytic’s Sales Engineering Team

A Framework

Abstract
The Sales Engineering Team within Catalytic is the technical partner to Sales Managers. As expert Catalytic users, Sales Engineers build custom demos, gather technical requirements and guide the customer to the best solution. This evolving document outlines a framework for the Sales Engineering Team including its responsibilities, skills, and interfaces with other departments like Sales, Product, Engineering, and Solution Delivery.
Knowledge & Skills of Sales Engineers
Sales Engineers are product experts with a deep technical understanding of Catalytic, the competitive landscape, and common enterprise software solutions. Simultaneously, Sales Engineers need problem solving and communication skills to quickly understand the customers needs and guide the customer to the optimal solution always with the goal to close the sale. The below list, which will grow and evolve over time, provides an overview of the general knowledge  and skills a Sales Engineer brings to Catalytic. The next section shows how these are applied in the sales cycle.

Understand and apply all Catalytic actions, integrations, and functionalities
Expert Catalytic process automation building skills
Build and present customer-relevant demos
Partner with Sales Managers to drive sale
Solution-driven thinking
Convey the benefits of Catalytic
Basic programming skills
Explain Catalytic architecture and security measures
Lead workshops to identify automation opportunities
Knowledge of automation market and competitors
Understand other commonly used enterprise software
Independently assess automation feasibility and effort in cooperation with our clients
Research customer company and industry


Sales Engineers’ role in the Sales Cycle
In close partnership with the Sales Managers, Sales Engineers are typically part of every pre-sales interaction of the Sales Manager with the customer. Outlined below is the Sales Engineers’ role in the general sales stages: Awareness, Discovery, Selling, Agreement, Closed.
Awareness
During the Awareness stage, when a potential new customer has been identified, Sales Engineering consults with the Sales Manager how to best approach the customer considering where our solution will have the best fit. By researching the company, its industry, and targeted department, Sales Engineers advise Sales Managers on which general demo to show or which example use cases to introduce. During this stage, Sales Engineers get a good understanding of the customer pains and requirements and can answer initial technical questions and gather any customer requirements. 
Awareness tl,dr:
Research potential customer
Deliver general demo
Field initial technical questions
Discovery
During Discovery, Sales Engineers discover and understand the needs of the customer in depth. Sales Engineers ask questions and gather technical requirements. Herein included are e.g. other systems the customer is using, volume and frequency of the proposed process, quality and structure of the process data. Sales Engineers will guide the customer to the best solution by proposing or demoing alternative solutions. The Sales Engineer can speak to Catalytic’s architecture, security standards, technical boundaries, development process or integration requirements. To support the customer in identifying fitting projects, Sales Engineers can lead automation idea brainstorming workshops and help with Return-on-Investment estimations to show the fast benefits of Catalytic automations. Depending on the complexity of the proposed project, Sales Engineers work closely with Product and Engineering during the Discovery phase.  
Discovery tl,dr:
Discover and understand customer need
Gather technical requirements
Guide customer to best solution
Showcase functionality
Lead automation idea brainstorming workshops
Interact with Product and Engineering
Selling
The Selling phase is all about showing our solution. Sales Engineers, as expert Catalytic builders, can quickly build prototypes or tailored demos showcasing basic functionality to convey to the customer the feasibility of their project. Sales Engineers lead the demo and cover all technical aspects of the solution. Based on the requirements gathered during Discovery, the Sales Engineer scopes the proposed project, writes a Statement of Work (SOW). The Sales Manager, in partnership with the Sales Engineer, prices the proposal.  Any SOW should be approved by Solution Delivery before sharing with the customer.
Selling tl,dr:
Showcase tailored demo
Scope project
Write SOW
Agreement
This phase belongs mostly to the Sales Manager. The Sales Engineer will tackle any technical objections and make sure no new technical requirements are added to the agreement without the approval of Sales Engineering and/or Solution Delivery.
Agreement tl;dr:
Field last technical objections
Closed
After the close of the contract, the Sales Engineer ensures a final hand-off to Solution Delivery and answers last questions about the project before moving on to the next opportunity.
Closed tl;dr:
Hand-off to Solution Delivery

Sales Managers and Sales Engineers: A Partnership to Success 
Selling a technical product like Catalytic is a team effort. Therefore, Sales Managers and Sales Engineers partner closely to drive the sale. Naturally, Sales Managers focus on the commercial part of the sale while Sales Engineers are the technical experts in front of the customer. Below table shows the key responsibilities of both Sales Manager and Sales Engineer and cooperative responsibilities.


Sales Manager
Cooperation
Sales Engineer
Present larger value proposition
Manage customer relationship
Get introductions to new groups
Identify budget & timeline
Pricing
Contracting

Guide customer to the best solution
Complete RFx

Deliver demos
Build tailored demos
Gather technical requirements
Identify technical roadblocks and discuss with Sales Manager
Write SOW
Clear SOW with Solution Delivery

It is preferable for one Sales Engineer to be teamed up with not more than 3 Sales Managers. These partnerships should last over a for a longer period of time to allow for a better understanding of the sales approach of either individual. The Head of Sales Engineering can help prioritize overlapping requests for a Sales Engineer in close communication with the Head of Sales. The Head of Sales Engineering also holds close relationships with the Engineering and Product departments to keep up-to-date with new functionality and system boundaries. 

Trusted Advisor: Aspirational goal for the Sales Engineering Team
Most goals for Sales Engineers such as delivering relevant demos, answering technical questions, scoping projects are clearly defined. But to meet and excel in these tangible goals, Sales Engineers should aspire to the higher, overarching goal of becoming Trusted Advisors. According to John Care, you can measure trust by Credibility, Reliability, Intimacy, Self-Orientation and Positivity (CRISP) using the following mathematical formula.

T=C+R+ISP

Below, we are looking at the five characteristics in this formula and how they apply to Sales Engineers at Catalytic and their ability to become Trusted Advisors:

Credibility
By showing a deep understanding of the technical aspect of Catalytic in line with a problem solving attitude, Sales Engineers build credibility with customers. This might also mean being open and honest with customers when Catalytic might not be the right solution for a particular problem they have. This can be an opportunity to gain trust by suggesting a better suited tool and then moving on to find a Catalytic use case.

Reliability
Stand by your word! Catalytic Sales Engineers provide customers and Sales Managers with realistic timelines and stick to what they promised.

Intimacy
Through research, empathy and interpersonal skills, Catalytic Sales Engineers know and understand their customers and the industry they are in. 

Self-Orientation
Catalytic Sales Engineers always put the customer first. When the customer wins, we win. 

Positivity
Sales Engineers at Catalytic look for solutions instead of problems. While Sales Engineers always consider possible roadblocks or risks, they use their internal network to find a solution or work-around. 
To-be-defined
What is and is not part of a tailored-demo? How much effort should go into it?
How to deal with customer actions/hosted actions
Sales Engineers’ KPIs
Hand-off meeting to Solution Delivery
Infrastructure for SE org over next 6 months
SE and AM for custom and configured (RACI chart)
